---
title: Introduction
layout: introduction
permalink: /introduction.html
cover: "/assets/cover_1"
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: true
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

## Historical records of Buddhism to the West
### Introduction
Western interest in Buddhism began around 150 years ago, although knowledge about Asian religions and philosophy was disseminated since the 17th century. The recognition of Buddhism as a distinct religion originated with Eugene Burnouf's outstanding work, L'introduction à l'histoire du buddhisme indien, (Paris 1844). Burnouf (1801-52) imposed a rational structuring on ideas hitherto perceived as unrelated and in so doing created the "prototype of the European concept of Buddhism"13 Following Burnouf's fundamental work, numerous studies appeared during the 7850s. Further treatises and translations paved the way for an enhanced know-edge and understanding of the foreign teachings. It was during the mid-19th century that orientalists, philosophers and Christian apologists in Europe and North America all of a sudden "discovered'14 Buddhism. Knowledge about Buddhism was, however, restricted to books and to collections in oriental libraries and scholars treated it as a textual object only. Thus, orientalists and philosophers first made Buddhism known in the West. In Germany, following the enthusiastic interpretations of the 'Orien-tal Renaissance', the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1869) inspired a wide interest in Buddhist philosophy and ethics among intellect-als, academics and artists. The North American east coast transcendental-ists Emerson (1803-82), Thoreau (1817-62) and Whitman (1819-92) praised Indian philosophy and introduced translations, produced in Europe, to members of the American middle and upper classes. Summing up, translations and literary of texts were the mediators that initiated the dissemination of Buddhism in the 'modernizing societies'. During this period, from the early 19th century to the 1880s, no Asian Buddhists with a missionary aim visited the West. Several events mark the end of the first and the onset of the second phase of adoption. In 1879 Sir Edwin Arnold (1832-1904) published his famous poem The Light of Asia, followed by Colonel Henry Steel Olcott's Buddhist Catechism in 1881. Both works, as well as the Buddhist Catechism (1888)by Friedrich Zimmermann (1865-1915)'S, praised the Buddha and his teaching. Echoing this overt glorification of the Asian religion, the first Westerners became Buddhists. In the early 1880s the German Paul Carus (1852-1919) and the Austrian Karl Eugen Neumann (1865-1915) became 'self-converted followers of the teaching! . The appeal of Indian spiritual- ity was strengthened by the intervention of the Theosophical Society. This society was founded in New York by Olcott (1832-1907) and Madame Blavatsky (originally the Russian Helene Hahn von Rottenstern, 1831-91) in 1875. Olcott and Blavatsky publicly embraced Buddhism in Ceylon in 188017 The first American formally to convert to Buddhism on American soil was the German-American Carl Theodor Strauss (1852-1937). After a public lecture by Anagârika Dharmapâla (1864-1933) at the Chicago 'World Parliament of Religions' in 1893, Strauss took refuge in the Buddha, Dharma (teaching) and Sangha (community)I* It should not be forgotten that just after the turn of the century Europeans went to South Asia to become ordained as monks in the Theravada tradition. Ananda Metteyya, the former Golden Dawn occultist Allen Bennett McGregor (1872-1923), and Nyânatiloka, former musician Anton W. F. Gueth (1879-1957), are among the most famous of these pioneer European monks. Both engaged in Buddhist activities in Burma and Celyon respectively, as well as in Europe. . It should be borne in mind thatthe Buddhist revival in South Asia, called by Bechert 'Buddhist Modern-ism' and by Gananath Obeyesekere 'Protestant Buddhism 20. , created various missionary impulses in Europe and North America. During this time, further translations and studies were published, special reference needs to be done to the Pali Text Society, founded by Thomas W. Rhys Davids (1843-1922) in 1881. Within the German-speaking world, Hermann Oldenberg (1854-1920) with his Päli based study Buddha: His Life, His Doctrine, His Order (1881/Engl. 1882) served to popularise Buddhism more than any other work of the time. Oldenberg's pathbreaking work was followed by important translations of the Indologist, Karl Eugen Neumann. Neumann, a Buddhist since 1884 travelled to Ceylon and India in 189421 • Around the turn of the century the first Buddhist organisations were formed in the West. In 1897 Anagârika Dharmapäla founded an American branch of the Mah@ Bodhi Society. In Europe the Indologist, Dr. Karl Seidenstücker (1876-1936), established the 'Society for the Buddhist Mission in Germany in Leipzig (1903). Likewise, Ananda Metteyya formed 'The Buddhist Society of Great Britain and Ireland' in London (1907). In lectures, pamphlets and books the first professed Buddhists tried to win recruits from the educated middle and upper classes. In Australia, however, only a few theosophists and a "handful of isolated Australian Buddhists" advocated Indian philosophy and religion; a Buddhist society was not founded until the early 1950s
The First World War serves as the demarcation between phase two and three?. In the United States and Australia there were comparatively few Buddhist activities between the 1920s and the late 1940s. Japanese Zen masters Nyogen Senzaki (1876-1958) and Sokei-an Sasaki (1882-1945) initiated small Zen meditation groups, but they attracted little interest. It was not until the return to America of Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki (1870-1966) for a long stay between 1950 and 1958 that Zen became popular and wide-spread.
Nevertheless, in Britain and Germany, Buddhism was now beginning to be practised, at least by its leading proponents. In contrast to the previous period, the teachings were to be conceived not only by the mind but also to be applied to the whole person. Religious practices such as spiritual exercises and devotional acts became part of German and British Buddhist life.
In 1921, Georg Grimm (1868-1945) and Seidenstücker initiated the
'Buddhist Parish for Germany and intended to employ a Buddhist itinerant preacher. The parish regarded itself as a religious community of Buddhist lay followers. Its members had taken refuge in the 'Three Jewels', i.e. in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, and followed the ethical precepts of lay Buddhists (the five silas). In 1924, Dr. Paul Dahlke (1865-1928) built the
"Buddhist House', which was part ordinary residence and part monastery, in which Dahlke led an ascetic and religious life similar to that of South Asian Buddhist monks. Two years later a temple and three hermitages for meditation retreats were added?. In addition, Dahlke had an eleven foot high memorial stone erected on the North German island of Sylt, paying public homage to the Buddha.
In London, Christmas Humphreys (1901-83) formed the Buddhist Society as a lodge of the Theosophical Society in 1924. A Buddhist shrine was opened in 1925 and Weak, the commemoration of the Buddha's birth, enlightenment and decease, was celebrated on a regular basis. As a result of Dharmapâla's missionary efforts in Britain during the mid-1920s, a branch of the Mahâ Bodhi Society was founded in 1926 and a Buddhist Vihâra (monastery) with three resident Theravâdin bhikkhus was established in London (1928-40, re-opened 1954)26
Compared to Germany, there were fewer Buddhist activities in Britain during the interwar period, yet even fewer in other European countries.
Apart from the founding of Les amis du Bouddhisme by Constance Louns-bery in France in 1929, there is evidence of only a few Buddhists. In Italy and in Austria, there were no Buddhist organisations during this period?.
The important thing to note about this period, is the inception of devotional and religious practices as an additional means for the dissemination of Buddhism in the West. At the same time the production of translations continued, albeit at a slower rate than in the period around 1900.

4. Plurality and Meditation
The Second World War marked an end to all public Buddhist activities in European capitals (except London) and cities. From the 1950s onwards new Buddhist traditions were transported to Europe. Japanese Shin Buddhism or Jôdo Shinshû (True Pure Land Teachings) was established in Britain (1952) and Germany (1956). Zen Buddhism became known through the writings of Suzuki and Eugen Herrigel (1884-1955). Tibetan Buddhism won its first followers in Berlin in 1952 through the establishment of the Western branch of the Arya Maitreya Mandala.
New Buddhist groups and societies were founded in various European countries. Buddhism spread more and more widely as attractive books and translations became more readily available. Simultaneously, Asian teachers began visiting the incipient groups, to lecture and conduct courses on a regular basis.
During the 1960s, a considerable change occurred in the way that members and interested people wanted to experience Buddhism both spiritually and physically. Meditation became very popular. Courses in vipassand meditation (Theravada tradition) and Zen meditation were booked up well in advance. Zen seminars (sesshins) took place in increasing numbers with Japanese teachers caming from Japan to guide the newly formed Zen groups?

In the United States, lecture tours by Suzuki instigated an upsurge of interest in Zen. At the same time, "Beat Zen" and "Square Zen" created by Allan Watts, Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac popularised Zen and attracted members of the emerging 'counter culture'. Some outstanding Japanese teachers settled in America as the immigration regulations were relaxed during the mid-1950s and '60s
Around 1960 "American Zen
turned from the intellectual to the practical"30 and various centres and temples were founded as young Americans returned from Japan having received a traditional education. In addition, further Buddhist traditions arrived from Asia, including the numerically strong Söka Gakkai.
In Australia, this phase somewhat parallels the development of the adoption of Buddhism in Europe around the turn of the century. The first organisation was founded in 1953, with a membership of mainly well-educated citizens. These few Buddhists in the mid-1950s "adopted Buddhism as a kind of hobby: it did not inform every breath taken“.Charles F. Knight (1890-1975) and Natasha Jackson (1902-90) "saw Buddhism as a triumph of rationalism and used it as a foil in their attacks on Christian-ity. It was a strongly intellectualised approach, going to great lengths to prove that Buddhism was fully consonant with scientific thinking"3. Just the same points were emphasised by Ananda Metteyya, Seidenstücker and by Dahlke 50 years earlier. As in other Western countries during the 1960s, Zen, Pure Land and Sôka Gakkai were also imported in Australia
In general, during this phase two characteristics stand out in contrast to the previous phases: Buddhism was no longer dominated by a single tradition or school, as had been the case in Europe with the Theravada and in the US with Zen. Rather, since the 1950s Buddhist teachers of various traditions arrived from Asia to win converts and to found centres. A plurality of Buddhist traditions emerged. Secondly, the shift from intellectual interest to practical application, partly begun during the 1920s, deepened and spread through increased interest in meditation. Meditational practices served as a further significant mediator in transplanting Buddhist traditions.
5. Boom of Tibetan Buddhism
The "Zen boom"S was followed by an upsurge of interest in Tibetan Buddhism since the mid-1970s. Tibetan teachers such as Tarthang Tulku (b.1935) and Chögyam Trungpa (1939-87) had already arrived in the US in 1969 and 1970 respectively. They formed their own organisations which established European branches during the 1980s. From the mid-1970s, high ranking lamas (advanced teachers) conducted preaching tours in Europe, North America and Australia. Many members of the protest movements and the 'counter culture' of the late 1960s/ early 1970s became, and continue to be, fascinated by Tibetan Buddhist rituals, symbols and the lives of the lamas. Within only two decades, Tibetan Buddhists were able to found a multitude of centres and groups, outnumbering all other traditions.
This rapid increase, accompanied by an expansion of already existing institutions, led to a considerable rise in the number of Buddhist groups and centres. In Britain, for example, the number of organisations quadrupled from 74 in 1979 to about 300 in 199437
In Germany, interest in Buddhism resulted in a fivefold increase in the number of centres and communities from less than 40 in 1975 to more than 200 in 199138.
. For the United States Don Morreale in 1988 listed 432 groups, centres and organi-sations, with 55 for Canada?.
Buddhism's rapid growth started with the cultural revolutions of the 1950s and '60s. With regard to Zen in the US its rise has been described as"dramatic, involving the establishment of hundreds of different centres"40 Henry Finney estimates that more than 90% of the American Buddhist groups and centres were founded during the 1970s and '80s*. Similarly, in Australia the number of Buddhists quadrupled from 35,000 (1981) to 140,000 (1991), organized in some 167 groups and societies*2
. This tremendous increase is, however, mostly due to a sharp numerical rise of Asian immigrants, having settled in Australia during the 1980s. A feature, likewise observable in the United States, France, Great Britain and Germany and very much in need of more attention than paid here*
The rapid growth of interest in Buddhism, and more generally in non-Christian religions, is to a certain extent due to wider socio-political changes in Western societies during the 1960s. Among many other things, these changes brought about a renewed interest in religious experience and spirituality. Within Buddhism, the meditational and devotional traditions of Japan and Tibet assumed a special appeal. This appears to resonate with
a general trend towards the revival of mystic and ritualistic elements in religious life within Western societies. These developments suggest that significant numbers of people who perceive contemporary society as spiri-tually uprooted and secularised desire life to be rekindled with spirituality and mystique. The cold, rational world, virtually deprived of all mystique (Entzauberung der Welt) should somehow become 're-enchanted' (wieder-verzaubert)#
Thus, apart from texts, Buddhist 'missionaries' and meditational forms it is possible to include religious ritual (liturgy) and mystical forms as further sources for spreading Buddhism to 'modern contexts'.Buddhism in the West is deeply marked by its heterogeneous and diverse appearance. A multitude of traditions and schools have embarked from their Asian home countries and successfully settled in urbanised, indu-strialised settings*. In the West, these schools and traditions to a large extent did not remain unchanged. Various sub-schools and sub-branches have evolved. In the course of time, a process of authentication of Western teachers by the Buddhist mother tradition in Asia occurred. This has given birth to both traditionally oriented centres and to independent centres, favouring developments of their own. Mention could be made of the Insight Meditation Society in the US, the English Sangha Trust centred in Britain (with four Theravada monasteries in Britain, one in Italy and one in Switzerland), the almost 200 centres and groups of the Association Zen Internationale (founded by Deshimaru Rôshi, 1914-82), centred in France.
Likewise, since the 1970s, Tibetan Buddhists have created a global network by way of touring lamas and a multitude of centres. In addition, Western Buddhist groups such as the Arya Maitreya Mandala (AMM) and the Friends of the Western Buddhist Order (FWBO) have became established on a worldwide basis.
